## Communities of practice

The behavior of others shapes and amplifies what we do. This happens socially through established norms and outcome expectations. Therefore, the people and environment that you are surrounded by will have an impact on your lifestyle and what you are able to accomplish as a person and as a designer. Surround yourself with the wrong people and environment, and you underperform and eliminate possibility. However, if you are surrounded by the right people and an environment rich with resources, energy, and inspiration; exciting possibilities can emerge. These ideas all point to the importance of something called a community of practice.

A community of practice is a collective of people who share learning goals within the same domain of human endeavor. This is seen in corporations to some extent by the grouping of employees together into departments based on role \(engineer, artist, marketer, etc.\), however, without meaningful interaction and learning, these are not communities. The reason that many people choose to move to dense urban environments like New York City is the same reason surfers move to the coast — you have to go to where the biggest waves are. It is much easier to participate in a community of practice if you are co-located. However, the advent of the Internet has somewhat removed the geographic imperative from a practice community. The three components of a community of practice include having a \(1\) common domain of study, \(2\) ongoing interaction with a group of people, and \(3\) active learning and production. An academic institution is designed to help facilitate communities of practice through established disciplines of study, by offering courses that bring students into the same space, and with course syllabi that describe how to learn something. The primary difference between a course and a community is that not all courses facilitate learning collaboration amongst students. Student organizations where students self-select into peer groups is perhaps more representative of a community, yet not all are for the purpose of learning and practice.

Seek these communities, find your people.



